#summary using Free Software to process photos

= Essential stuff = 

In my opinion two most important Free Software applications for photographer are GIMP and RawTherapee. GIMP is alive for more than 15 years and it's quite mature. RawTherapee has been open sourced in 2010.

  * Gimp - http://www.gimp.org/
  * RawTherapee - http://www.rawtherapee.com/

GREYC's Magic Image Converter is very interesting utility which can be used in GIMP (or without it). 
  * gmic - http://gmic.sourceforge.net/

elsamuko GIMP scripts shows how to achieve different colors by using mix of curves, layers, blending, etc. Most scripts leave their edits on extra layers to reconstruct the work flow (Press ctrl-L to view the layers.)
  * elsamuko scripts - http://sites.google.com/site/elsamuko/gimp

I used Digikam for a few years, got many problems with it, finally in 2011 I decided to drop it and use something simpler, currently the best viewer/manager for RAWs I found is geeqie (it's a fork of gqview)
  * geeqie - http://geeqie.sourceforge.net/

Dan Margulis is Photoshop expert, but the stuff he described is not photoshop-specific, you can achieve that in many tools, and I tried to follow his steps in GIMP, RT and gmic. The goal of delaboratory is to support everything Dan Margulis described.

  * http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dan_Margulis

David Riecks homepage with skin tone calculator chart:

  * http://www.riecks.com/digitalinfo.html

= Limitations =

Limitations of Gimp:
  * 8-bit per channel
  * no adjustment layers
  * only RGB preview
  * no lockable samplers

Limitations of RT:
  * no layers
  * no RGB curves, no CMYK at all
  * no lockable samplers
  * can't "pick color" on curves (like in GIMP)

Limitations of GMIC:
  * using as Gimp plugin means 8-bit on input, 8-bit on output
  * there are layer effects but they use Gimp layers, so see previous point
  * no GUI, limited GUI as Gimp plugin
  * no samplers at all


= Skin Tone =

Typical color correction problem is how to achieve good skin tone.
Popular method is called "skin color by numbers" and is described by Dan Margulis.
One should use curves tool to find good balance between Magenta, Yellow, Cyan and Black values.
This method requires CMYK sampler and curves tool.

Sampler in Gimp works in RGB, HSV and CMYK modes, but CMYK mode is broken.
It is possible to decompose image to CMYK layers but it's not possible to see how they look together, until will be recomposed again into RGB image.
It makes using this method very hard.

Each developer I was discussing CMYK problem thinks, that CMYK is just a colorspace for printing, so it doesn't really matter when processing photos you don't want to print. And that's the main reason why this stuff is not implemented in any Free Software application.

= LAB Colorspace =

LAB colorspace separates luminance from color. It's very powerful colorspace. It's available in Gimp only as a decompose/recompose option. You can work with LAB layers same way as with CMYK layers - without seeing how the final image looks.

RawTherapee has LAB curves, lots of internal stuff works in LAB and there are LAB values in navigator (sampler) window.

GMIC has support for both LAB and CMYK.

= 8-bit =

8-bit per channels means that each color component can have only 256 values, which means 256*256*256 --> 16 million of RGB colors. 

You may think that this is not real problem if you want just to create photos to publish on Internet. The truth is that depth of output image doesn't really matter. We all watch 8-bit JPEGs. The real problem is depth of processing.

Any visual effect, like brightness/contrast/curves/mixer/etc in 8-bit will transform 256 values into another 256 values. If you map only 256 values into 256 values you will notice that some values are duplicated, for instance if you increase contrast the value 0 and value 1 and value 2 may change to 0 from the one side and value 255 and value 254 and value 253 may change to 255 on the other side. If you decrease contrast you will notice that for instance values 127, 128 and 129 will change to 128. In both cases you will lose some data and there is no way to make it back.

|| original value || after increasing contrast || trying to make it back || result ||
|| 0 || 0 || 0 || OK ||
|| 1 || 0 || 0 || quality lost ||
|| 2 || 0 || 0 || quality lost ||
|| 3 || 1 || 3 || OK ||
|| 4 || 1 || 3 || quality lost ||
|| 251 || 254 || 252 || quality lost ||
|| 252 || 254 || 252 || OK ||
|| 253 || 255 || 255 || quality lost ||
|| 254 || 255 || 255 || quality lost ||
|| 255 || 255 || 255 || OK ||

The more effects you will use, the more you damage your image. That's the main reason 8-bit per channel is evil.

It doesn't really matter what is the depth of your result, it may be 8-bit JPEG in grayscale. But if you use 8-bit for processing you will notice banding.

GIMP is limited to 8-bit, so the work you do in GIMP (like clone, healing brush or crop) should be performed AFTER you correct color/contrast.

= Adjustment layers and samplers =

Without adjustment layers each change is pernament, yes you can make undo or you can create millions of layers, but if you want to change something you did 5 layers ago it's a real problem and you will probably start over.

The serious limitation of GIMP is that you can't really do much at the time you edit curves or mixer. You have to click OK and then you can't go back, you must open curve window again and draw it again (or load it if you saved it).  

RT by design works as a set of predefined adjustment layers - you can change everything again and again, but you can't redefine order of effects.

There is one sampler in RT, but you need to move mouse cursor over the image to sample, so when you are working with curves or mixer or anything else - you can't really read how values change, you need to trust your eyes and histogram.

= Curves and Mixer vs "user friendly sliders" =

I am fan of Dan Margulis methods of color correction. Most of the stuff can be achieved by using curves, color mixer and blending. Sliders like "brightness" or "contrast" or "levels" are just interfaces to curves, it's good for newbie but you shouldn't use "contrast" slider to increase contrast on your photo if you don't want to clip your highlights and shadows, curve give you full control.

The truth is that with mix of curves, mixers and blending you can achieve very interesting effects, and they will look much better than when drawing with brushes on your photo.