#summary Books

= intro =

There are many good books about photography, I am not going to write here about them. What I show you is list of books about retouching, describing techniques you could use in delaboratory.

Most people use other techniques. For instance there is a common way of portrait retouching - blur everything and draw on mask to "soften skin". I don't like it - and I don't like the result. In my opinion it's better to use methods described in following books - and as a last step - use clone tool and healing brush (for instance in GIMP). 

= Dan Margulis =

*Professional Photoshop: The Classic Guide to Color Correction*

This is probably best book ever written about retouching.

It's not a Photoshop manual, it's a complete description of techniques and rules.
And the way he teach is different than people usually work.
No selections, no drawing on masks, no drawing on picture. Just operation on channels.

When I started to read it I realized this is the way I want to process my photos. 
First I tried that in GIMP, and later with RawTherapee and GMIC.

This book is the main reason why I started delaboratory. I just need Free application which will support every technique from this book. And if you read it you know how close I am.

I am just not sure what to do with sharpening (chapter 6), color profiles and printing (some parts of chapters 12, 13, 15). Will see.

= Lee Varis =

*Skin: The Complete Guide to Digitally Lighting, Photographing, and Retouching Faces and Bodies*

  * Chapter 4 - skin color
  * Chapter 5 - contrast, BW
  * Chapter 7 - special effects - Blur Layer will be created to support stuff from this chapter (this technique works great in GIMP, will work even better in delaboratory because float precision and color spaces)

= John Beardsworth =

*Advanced Digital Black & White Photography*

Lots of stuff about curves, blending and mixers. 

= Michael Freeman =

*The Complete Guide to Black & White Digital Photography*

Similar scope as previous book. Using mostly mixer of 6 channels (reds, yellows, greens, cyans, blues, magentas). I am thinking about implementing Zone System, at least as view mode.
