#summary Development News

-----
*2012.05.01*

Replaced USM with sharpen and local contrast.

New, simpler vignette.

Added fill layer. Examples of use: in RGB set in overlay mode. In LCH disable luminance channel, then set hue/chroma (make sure opacity is 1.0). In LAB disable luminance channel and play with A/B values.

-----
*2012.04.28*

I implemented new layer hierarchy, so I was able to start implementing new conversion subsystem which already works. There is now also a warning which tells you about conversion clipping, so if you are converting ProPhoto or LAB into sRGB or CMYK you will see how many pixels are out and in that case decrease contrast - image will be "flat" but you won't lose any details.

There is also a brand new levels layer. With auto levels feature. Levels is just an easy interface to 3-points curve. With opacity slider it's very powerful thing. The best colorspace to start is CMYK. If you will try autolevels with AB channels in LAB you will need to decrease opacity a lot.

-----
*2012.04.19*

CMYK curves are awesome.

-----
*2012.04.16*

Updated list of [operations] planned for 0.8, also listed typical workflows.

-----
*2012.04.14*

I removed opening RAW files in LAB mode, now there is only !ProPhoto.

White Balance now works in LAB, sRGB and !ProPhoto, just open Basic Layer and click on image. sRGB and !ProPhoto WB needs improvements, but LAB looks OK.

Apply Luminance Layer now works in sRGB, !ProPhoto and CMYK. But it's not configurable (it uses Greeen or Magenta channels).

I will need some way to store multiple full-size images. For instance I need such image for noise texture (film grain, etc). Another reason is c2g. My brand new idea for c2g is to process it on thread, from the original source image. This way user won't be blocked and some kind of "texture layer" should be updated in realtime.

Still no idea what's the best way to support G'MIC. Probably same way as c2g - call it on full size image on separate thread. But this way it won't be able to call G'MIC on alreaady processed image (because the processed layers are not in full scale). So maybe it will require to "flatten layers" i.e. to calculate final, full size image before calling G'MIC.

If I will go into full-size images I could introduce paiting support. Or at least true dodge/burn.

Another thing I need to remember about are layer masks. 

-----
*2012.04.13 - started post-0.7 development*

Layer masks have been temporarily removed.
Apply color and apply luminance has been removed from blend frame.
There is new Apply Luminance Layer. For now it works only in sRGB and is not configurable at all. It applies green channel in luminance mode. 

-----
*2012.04.11 - more plans*

[operations] - I listed operations for typical postprocessing workflow

-----
*2012.04.09 - delaboratory 0.7 has been released*

This release adds support for RAW files, image zoom, basic settings (brightness, contrast, saturation, etc.), an equalizer layer, a double vignette layer, a !ProPhoto RGB colorspace, an improved GUI and bugfixes.
-----

* 2012.04.04 - color matrix *

I finished implementing color matrix. It's a tool to analyze colors in photo or image. I like the idea of using colors from another photograph or from classical painting. Currently it is only possible to see which LAB colors are used. In the future it will be also possible to copy colors to some kind of palette - and then use it, for samplers or for new layer types. The goal is to make it very easy to use colors in one photo from another.

-----

* 2012.03.31 - plans after 0.7 *

I have quite clear view of what I want to achieve after 0.7 release. The multithreading was added in 0.6 and looks stable, the RAW support will be added in 0.7 and also looks good. Now I want to improve user interface and general user feeling again.

From what I see most people don't understand the idea of multiple colorspaces at all. They want to use "only LAB because LAB is the best" which is nonsense. They understand what is "luminance curve" but they want to use it as in GIMP - by combining RGB, which is of course bad idea. They understand what is "saturation" and want to change it, but they don't see the reason to use HSL, HSV or LCH.

The first thing too change will be to "hide" colorspaces from user. If you are in RGB and want to use luminance curve, you need to click "convert to LAB" then "curves" then play with L curve, this is too complex path, instead there will be "luminance curve" button, when you click it you will see luminance curve to play, and you won't need to worry in which colorspace are you. The main problem with this idea is that there will be very big number of possible buttons, so I must find good way to put that into gui. And just long list of "effects" is not nice to use. I still want to follow KISS.

The second thing will be to put "blend settings" in the "action window", so if you will play with curves, vignette or dodge/burn you will have "opacity" slider to play without need to open another window. This is not complex task, but it requires to make all "action windows" similar at some level, the work on this is already started.

And the last thing are layer masks. If I move blend settings from blend window, there will be only layer mask left. I want to improve managing layer masks, so people will see they are there and they could learn how to use them.

The biggest task is still integration with G'MIC. Step by step I am moving to this direction.

The other tasks are more effects - like c2g or wavelet sharpening.

-----

* 2012.03.25 - 0.6.9.1 beta has been released *

   * basic RAW support via dcraw executable 
   * zoom support 
   * basic layer (brightness, contrast, saturation, etc)
   * equalizer layer (two versions with 8 bands and 16 bands)
   * double vignette layer
   * more direct conversions, including more BW conversions, started BW mixer presets

Partha created *initial Mac release*. "Only works on Snow Leopard and
higher (at least I think it should work on higher like Lion). Won't
work for Mac version less than 10.8." 

*We need your feedback* Please report all crashes and serious problems so they could be fixed *before stable 0.7 release* which is planned for Easter.

----

* 2012.03.10 - equalizer *

Equalizer Layer has been implemented. It's available in all colorspaces except RGB/!ProPhoto.

It works great in HSV, HSL and LCH but in LAB GUI needs improvements.
Also I will probably split this huge window into pieces (like in curves or use notebook pages).

Next release is planned for next week or later (depends if any issues with new code appear).

----

* 2012.02.29 - Two pass RAW loading *

RAW is now loaded twice. First lower quality, then - on separate thread - full quality.
To notice difference please zoom image immediately after load.

----

* 2012.02.27 - Zoom *

Zoom support is back. This time the UI is minimalistic. You can only select zoom area once, then you need to unzoom with "full" button. Have fun with zooming.

----

* 2012.02.25 - Basic Layer *

after long long time I realized it's a good idea to add some kind of "basic control" to help people play with delaboratory, that's why Basic Layer has been created

in this layer you can play with stuff like *brightness*, *contrast*, *saturation* and similar stuff

of course this is nothing new, each of these operations can be done with curves layer, but with sliders it's sometimes easier, for instance it's easier to change saturation with slider than playing with AB channels in LAB

so... curves are for real post processing, and basic layer is for some basic tweaking

have fun

----

* 2012.02.23 - colorspaces *

If you want to explore full potential of delaboratory - please try different [ColorSpaces]

----

* 2012.02.20 - Kodak !ProPhoto *

!ProPhoto colorspace is now supported (display and output is still sRGB only), direct conversion to/from LAB is available 

----

* 2012.02.18 - basic RAW support

Basic RAW support has been checked in into SVN.

It works by calling dcraw executable, so no additional library is used. It means that delaboratory is still camera independent, for new camera support you will need to update only dcraw.

There are 5 colorspaces available in dcraw: sRGB, Adobe, Wide, !ProPhoto and XYZ.

delaboratory now calls dcraw with !ProPhoto output, then it loads it and converts into LAB.

It means that before you convert your photo into RGB you can take care about all the details in highlights and shadows inside LAB colorspace, which is wider than sRGB. 

Name of the RGB colorspace has been changed into sRGB to make everything clear.

We were able to make it work also on Windows, after few hours of testing new code with Partha we found the problem and now it's solved :)

Of course this is just a start. Expect dcraw settings (like VNG/PPG/AHD), some brightness/contrast/saturation sliders and support for crop.

----

* 2012.02.12 - delaboratory 0.6 has been released *

This is another major project milestone.

Multithreading support was biggest task this time. We released 4 beta versions to fix all problems with it - let's hope it's also stable on your system.

There are new action layer types: 
   * dodge / burn - the way to "add depth" on your photo, I am very happy with this tool, please experiment in RGB but also in other color spaces with it
   * shadows / highlights - this is a tool to bring back some details in shadow and highlight areas of your photo
   * high pass - you can use it for sharpen (blend mode overlay) but there are also more interesting uses - you can find them with google 
   * vignette - you can define its center, its radius and its darkness and light levels, primary usage is of course in the RGB but if you use it on separate channel you can produce interesting color effects (try A or B in LAB)

There is now also easy way to produce sepia or similar images. Just convert to BW and then convert to LCH or HSV or HSL. With sliders (and presets) you can choose color.

As you can see there are also two options to set.
   * real time - enabled by default, means that each change is visible on image immediately, so when you move slider the image will be constantly updated, which may be slow on some systems, so you can disable it in this case
   * auto UI - disabled by default, means that the layer setup will open automagically when you add new layer, so for instance if you click curves you will see a curves editor

GUI has been improved again. For instance samplers are moved back to main window - to notebook.

And of course lots of bugs have been fixed.

Windows builds are provided by Partha (http://partha.com/), who also helped a lot with debugging Windows version. Also big thanks to all beta testers!

Have fun!

----

* delaboratory 0.6 features: *

   * floating point precision (32 bits per channel)
   * native support for 8 color spaces (RGB, BW, CMYK, CMY, LAB, LCH, HSL, HSV)
   * fully non-destructive editing (adjustement layers)
   * input/output - 16-bit TIFF (or 8-bit JPEG) 
   * curves
   * channel mixer
   * advanced blending (normal, multiply, screen, overlay, overlay inv, add, grain extract, grain merge, sub, difference, darken, lighten, dodge, burn) with masks
   * apply luminance / apply color in RGB colorspace
   * gaussian, surface and box blur
   * unsharp mask
   * high pass
   * dodge / burn (with sliders, no painting)
   * shadows / highlights
   * vignette 
   * color samplers, histograms
   * Free Software (GPLv3)
   * KISS (keep it simple) design 
   * small (120KB source code archive)

-----

Delaboratory *does not support color profiles*. If you feel your style of photography is limited when using 16-bit sRGB output - delaboratory is not application for you. (It may change in the distant future but this is totally low priority feature) Please note that photos you watch in your browser on websites like 1x.com or deviantart.com are just 8-bit JPEGs.

-----

delaboratory 0.5 GUI presentation:

<wiki:video url="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FHl1zXsM_fA" width=720 height=480 />

(this is first video I have ever made, I used xvidcap and openshot, I am not really happy with the result, but it's a good start)

----

much better presentation video made by Alexandre Prokoudine from libregraphicsworld.org: http://vimeo.com/31072366

article: http://libregraphicsworld.org/blog/entry/photo-editor-delaboratory-0-5-gets-an-updated-ui
----