#summary project summary

Delaboratory is my personal hobby project. I started it in early 2011.

The main inspiration was the book of Dan Margulis "Photoshop The Classic Guide to Color Correction" and my experiences with !RawTherapee, GIMP and G'MIC. 

Delaboratory is not in any way inspired by interface of Adobe products, it is rather a mixture of GIMP and !RawTherapee. In terms of philosophy of use, however, it is consistent with the techniques of Dan Margulis, which can not be reproduced with other free projects.

My main problems with GIMP can be simply described on an example of curves:

  * The first problem is that the 8-bit color processing means that each operation is an lossy operation - the image quality is destroyed, in practice, and not theory - this can be seen with the naked eye. GeGL won't fix that problem if layers are still stored as 8-bit.
  * The second problem is that the Gimp does not directly support the LAB and CMYK, and I need to use curves in these colorspaces. 
  * The third problem is that when user clicks OK, curve can't be edited again. To make any changes in curve we need to start over.
  * The fourth problem is that you can not create color samplers on the picture and observe values during the editing of curves. And this is required by technique called "color by numbers".

All these problems are solved by delaboratory since its first version.

I called delaboratory "color correction utility", since this type of
term seemed most appropriate, especially after reading Dan Margulis book. Unfortunately for many people "color correction" is associated with
"color management" and this is associated with calibration, color profiles and in general as the most faithful representation of one true picture. This is in clear contradiction with the main objective of the project - which is the creative manipulation of color and contrast of photo.

A similar problem occurs with 32-bit color, I used it because it
is required by colorspace conversions and operations such as the curves. Unfortunately, many people do not understand the problems of depth of color and think that 16-bit processing is needed only for 16-bit images, so 32-bit processing must produce some incredible depth of color. While the truth is, 32-bit processing is needed, even if we want to make 8-bit JPG.

The another thing is CMYK. This is the best color space for curves manipulation (so also for levels), it is the best way to correct skin colors, and
this is the best color space for sharpening portraits. Unfortunately for most technical people, CMYK is usable only for printing. As far as I know delaboratory is the only open source application (except G'MIC) which supports CMYK operations. Moreover, I met with the opinions that my desire to work in
CMYK is stupid because "it does not matter whether the curves are RGB or CMYK - the result will be the same". And yes - it is a common opinion among developers.

Color spaces such as LAB or !ProPhoto are very wide. There
are theories that all processing should be done for example in LAB to "get the best quality". This nonsense also runs counter to the philosophy delaboratory. At least some people understand what is interesting in the LAB (as opposed to CMYK). 

Delaboratory does not support color profiles, the target color space
is sRGB. Display also takes place in sRGB. When importing RAW file - !ProPhoto RGB colorspace is used. It is not really good for processing (too wide), but it helps preserving the maximum detail from original source, so it may be a good way
transition. 

If the gamut of sRGB limits your photographic style - delaboratory is not an application for you. If your goal is to achieve faithful original colors of photo - you don't need delaboratory, because it meets completely different role. Just use the raw processor - such as !RawTherapee, Darktable or Photivo (in my opinion the best is !RawTherapee).

Despite the similar functionality delaboratory is not an alternative to
any of these programs. Not only does not support color profiles, but also has no
typical RAW processor features such as denoising or demosaicing settings. Delaboratory it is not an alternative to GIMP - you can't paint in it.

The closest application in the matter of functionality is G'MIC, that's why I want to integrate it somehow into delaboratory - so it will be possible to use all G'MIC filters inside delaboratory workflow.

There is one important document you should read to fully understand why I believe you should not care about quaility so much and instead focus on creativity. Have fun: http://www.kenrockwell.com/tech/7.htm