#summary Target Users

= Is delaboratory for you? =

== You use commercial software to postprocess your photos. ==

*NO* I see no single point to use delaboratory in this case. The GUI will be different, the philosophy will be different, the functionality will be different. And if you already paid lots of money for commercial product there is no point to use free software in early stages of development.

== You just want to fix brightness, contrast, etc... with some easy sliders =

*NO* There are many good applications for this kind of postprocessing. Try Google Picasa for example. Or Digikam. If you think "contrast slider" is better than "tone curve" then there is nothing delaboratory could offer for you.

== You have RAW photos and want to generate JPG photos =

*NO* delaboratory is not a RAW converter. I recommend using RawTherapee for interative work and ufraw-batch for console.

== You use GIMP and you miss some features ==

*YES* As long as the features you expect are in delaboratory of course. You should call delaboratory first and then send result to GIMP to finish your process. Please read [Background] for more info.

== You use free RAW converter and you miss some features ==

*YES* After you finish your work in RAW converter you can send the 16-bit tiff to delaboratory and work safely without any quality loss. Please read [Background] for more info.

== You are interested in graphics processing and want to experiment ==

*YES* Enjoy!

== You need dodge/burn and other painting effects ==

*NO* delaboratory doesn't support painting at all. So you can't dodge or burn, you can't paint on layer mask you can clone or heal. It may change in the future but for now you need per-pixel editor like GIMP for this task.