#summary Working with RAW files

= Basic use of delaboratory in combination with dcraw and Geeqie =

dcraw is the raw decoder used by many raw converters. It is available for all platforms. It does the job real good.

Geegie is a nice image viewer for Linux desktops. It is fast and can do really a lot.

I convert my raw's using dcraw into 16 tiff's for use in delaboratory.

The command i use in Geegie is:

dcraw -T -W - w -6 %F

(convert the image selected *-%F* to a 16 bits  *-6* tiff file *-T*  , while do not brighten *-W* and keep camera whitebalance *-w*) 
Type in a terminal dcraw if you want to see more options.
If you feel the dcraw output is to dark. Remove the -W switch

I made a shortcut in Geeqie executing the dcraw command so i don't have to type the command any time i need to convert an image from raw to tiff. Right mouse on the image and the Geegie short cut converts the image running the dcraw command.

I also did make a shortcut in Geegie to delaboratory so i can open images with the use of my right mouse button .

The added short cuts in Geegie are:

*Update on dcraw and use off it in combination with delaboratory*

We did find out that the command as mentioned adds an ICC profile to the file which delab ignores. Loading a tampered file as result.

This can be fixed by running this dcraw command: dcraw -T -6 -w -c myrawfile.raw then run:  tifficc -W -n myrawfile.tiff

One will need to install if not installed yet liblcms-utils as that package contains tifficc

I did make a bash file what does automate this. 
download can be done here: http://www.mediafire.com/?7lxlhgge1izf920

If you want to use it copy it as root to /usr/bin

I also did create a .desktop file

can be found here: http://www.mediafire.com/?8r1095tnhf3qt1c

If you copy it as root to /usr/share/applications an menu entry will be created also one can right click on a raw file. It then will be opened in delaboratory.

*raw2delab* 

When installed one can use rightmouse on a RAW file and it will be opened in delab.

A debian / Ubuntu installer can be found here:
http://www.mediafire.com/?cz37e7t9ggtrzzh


---------------------------------------
For dcraw:
---------------------------------------

{{{

[Desktop Entry]
Encoding=UTF-8

Version=9.08
Name=dcraw

GenericName=dcraw

Comment=convert RAWs

Type=Application

Categories=Graphics;Photography;

Exec=dcraw -T -w -W -6 %F

TryExec=dcraw

Icon=

Terminal=true

StartupNotify=true

MimeType=application/x-photivo;image/x-dcraw;image/bmp;image/jpeg;image/png;image/tiff;

}}}

-----

For delaboratory

---------------------------------------

{{{
[Desktop Entry]

Encoding=UTF-8

Version=SVN

Name=delab

GenericName=delaboratory

Comment=color enhancement utillity

Type=Application

Categories=Graphics;Photography;

Exec= delaboratory %F

TryExec=delaboratory

Icon=

Terminal=true

StartupNotify=true

MimeType=application/x-photivo;image/x-dcraw;image/bmp;image/jpeg;image/png;image/tiff;


}}}